Since I started writing this book a year and a half ago, the feeling
that I'm drowning in datasets has only increased. In a single recent
week, I received 18GB of data from a police intelligence firm, another
100GB of data from a mass transit agency's police department, and a copy
of the Transportation Security Agency's No Fly List. This is a fairly
typical week, and, as usual, I haven't had a chance to look at any of
them yet.

I'm so happy that you've finished reading this book, because now you can
use your newfound skills to help investigate this never-ending flood of
datasets. There aren't nearly enough of us with these skills, so I'm
excited that you've joined the ranks. I hope you'll use your skills to
discover and publish secret revelations and make a positive impact on
the world while you're at it.

This book is crammed with technical information, but it's far from a
comprehensive guide to investigating leaked and hacked datasets. I
merely scratched the surface on a wide swath of
technologies that come into play, like using the command line,
programming in Python, using Docker containers, working with SQL
databases, and analyzing structured data. There are countless books
dedicated to each of these topics. But while there's a lot left to
learn, you should now have a solid foundation to build on.

The best way to gain confidence in these skills, and to learn more, is
to jump in headfirst and just start using them. Go to the DDoSecrets
website, see what the collective has published recently, and subscribe
to its newsletter so you'll get email alerts when new datasets are
released. If you find a dataset that looks interesting and is available
for anyone to download, launch your BitTorrent client, download it, and
see if you can make sense of it. If you find a dataset released under
limited distribution, meaning that DDoSecrets will give it only to
journalists and researchers (like you!), request access. As long as you
plan on publishing any revelations you find, you shouldn't have a
problem gaining access.

Depending on the dataset you're looking at, you might hit technical
hurdles that aren't covered in this book and that you don't know how to
solve. I often come across data that I don't recognize and don't know
how to proceed with. Most of the time, I end up searching the internet
to figure out my next steps. Sometimes I even learn how to use new
technologies that I have no prior experience with, like new types of
databases or software, so I can import and explore the data. As your
skills grow, you'll be able to do the same using online documentation
and, most importantly, trial and error. Don't be afraid to experiment.

As you're exploring new datasets, automate as much of your work as
possible by writing simple Python scripts like the ones sprinkled
throughout this book. Regularly writing code is, by far, the best way to
get better at programming. Also publish your interesting findings, even
if they're minor. If you don't work for a newsroom, start a blog and
publish your work there. The more investigations you publish, the more
likely it is that potential sources will notice you, start up secure
communications with you, and send you datasets to analyze. Be precise in
your reporting and, as much as possible, show your work. Investigating
leaked and hacked datasets is cool, and people will love to read about
the details that you've discovered, how you discovered them, and how you
verified that they're true.

Good luck! Get in touch at *micah@micahflee.com* to let me know if you
find any revelations.